%Coevolution of Medical Malpractice Claims and Causes of Death Over Time
%Bryce Bartlett [^a]

**Working Paper**

[^a]: PhD Candidate, Duke University Department of Sociology and Duke Population Research Institute. Research supported by National Institute of Aging Grant 5T32AG000139-27.

---
csl: ./citations/law-and-society.csl
bibliography: ./citations/malpractice.bib
date: 7/10/2016
abstract: "Focused primarily on tort reform, analysts have proposed links between patient safety and malpractice claims. Two associations are prominent: (1) better patient safety leads to fewer medical errors and fewer malpractice claims, and (2) over-aggressive malpractice compensation encourages defensive medicine, where physicians attempt to reduce malpractice risk by ordering unnecessary medical procedures (or foregoing certain types of care). This literature is focused primarily on physician behavior and rates relative to physicians, largely leaving out large-scale public health data. Nevertheless, for decades public health researchers have used mortality statistics to measure, track, and investigation population health, including patient safety. This study tests the proposed associations between patient safety and paid malpractice claims from a population health perspective by combining nationwide multiple mortality data collected by the National Center for Health Statistics (under the Centers for Disease Control) with data about paid malpractice claims from the National Practitioner Data Bank. Using hybrid fixed/random effect negative binomial models, this study investigates associations between paid malpractice claims alleging death, and deaths reported to the NCHS as occurring because of complications or accidents related to medical care (iatrogenic causes of death). The study finds (1) a positive association between deaths due to medical complications and subsequent paid malpractice claims; (2) a small, but positive association between paid malpractice claims and subsequent deaths due to medical complications; and (3) a stronger association between paid malpractice claims and subsequent deaths due to medical complications, where malpractice claims within a state have increased relatively rapidly." 
---


#Introduction

A number of studies have identified trends and changes in medical malpractice claims over time, including the waxing and waning of claims and responses to these changes, primarily through tort reform [@paik_receding_2013; @baker_medical_2005]. The thrust for most of this literature and analysis is to distinguish malpractice claims that result from misconduct and error, and malpractice claims that are merely spurious [@baker_medical_2005]. Separating these claims is both a theoretical and empirical project. The fundamental issue is identifying the inter-relationship between malpractice claims and medical care. The particular pathways from medical care to malpractice claims focus on quality of care. The suggested association is that better medical care leads to more claims, and conversely that worse medical care leads to fewer claims [@greenberg_is_2010].

Importantly, there are also assertions that the tenor and quality of malpractice claims impacts the quality of patient care, commonly under the moniker of "defensive medicine" [@baker_medical_2005]. Literature in this vein ordinarily focuses on physician practice, and increases in health care costs from unnecessary tests and procedures [@kessler_doctors_1996; @mello_national_2010; @frakes_surprising_2015]. However, an even more troubling implication for "defensive medicine" is that an increase in unnecessary medical care should also lead to poorer patient health. Any health procedure has an inherent risk, and over-treatment should lead to larger numbers of detrimental outcomes, stemming directly from medical care [@kessler_evaluating_2011]. All medical care comes with inherent risks, and the suboptimal care suggested by defensive medicine should also be observable in population health, and not solely physician practice and health care costs.

This study focuses on these three simple predictions: (1) that better patient outcomes lead to fewer malpractice claims, (2) increases in malpractice claims lead to poorer reported patient outcomes, and (3) larger spikes in malpractice claims have more pronounced effects on patient outcomes. I address these fundamental expectations from a population health and social epidemiological perspective, using nationwide mortality statistics across states, and controlling for state characteristics on tort reform and medical malpractice claims.

Consistent with its focus on population health, this study uses the multiple morbidity file collected from each state and aggregated by the National Center for Health Statistics under the auspices of the Centers for Disease Control (NCHS) for the years 1999-2008 [@centers_for_disease_control_and_prevention_national_center_for_health_statistics_multiple_2016]. Using this file, I identify trends for causes of death related to complications or "misadventures" of medical care. While this measure has not been used for quality of care in prior work on medical malpractice, it is similar to the adverse events measures used in prior studies focused on a smaller geographical areas focused on particular hospitals [*e.g.* @greenberg_is_2010]. It is also administrative data collected by the same government agency (and in the same manner) as birth records that have been used to studying defensive medicine related to births [*e.g.* @dubay_impact_1999]. Expanding to this broader measure of mortality due to medical complications allows nationwide analysis instead of just a few states, or a few hospitals within states, but also looks at a broader swath of patients than those giving birth. I combine the NCHS data with data on malpractice claims against physicians from the National Practitioner Databank (NPDB) for the years 2003-2008 [@u.s._department_of_health_and_human_services_health_resources_and_services_administration_bureau_of_helath_professions_division_of_the_practitioner_data_bank_national_2015]. As discussed more fully below, to maintain the comparability of the claims and the mortality dataset, only serious malpractice claims, *i.e.* those alleging death are utilized.

These two datasets provide for parallel time series across states. Employing a hybrid negative binomial count model (which includes a state-level fixed effect and differenced component), I find (1) a positive association between the number of deaths due to medical complications and subsequent paid malpractice claims based on allegations of wrongful death; (2) an association between paid malpractice claims based on allegations for wrongful death and subsequent deaths due to medical complications, consistent with predictions of defensive medicine; and (3) a larger association between persistently rising paid claims malpractice claims in a state, and subsequent deaths due to medical complications.

#Background

Fundamentally, law and policy surrounding medical malpractice relates directly to public health and safety. Medical practice is subject to both licensure and standard-of-care rules and regulations [@timmermans_world_2010; @timmermans_evidence-based_2004]. These are intended to protect the public and protect the health and safety of the populace [@rothman_medical_2000]. In fact, some of the most basic medical practices, like washing hands, have made profound differences in patient outcomes, including reductions in mortality, although there are still difficulties with compliance [@pittet_hand_2004; @best_ignaz_2004]. In addition, as with all tort law, medical malpractice is designed to take care of individuals wronged by the failure of the medical system to meet reasonably expected standards of care [@kessler_evaluating_2011]. Of course, these ideal designs are subject to the imperfections related to laws and agency externalities. One of the more concretely defined arguments against law and policy, is a fear that more aggressive malpractice systems can lead to "defensive medicine" [@kessler_doctors_1996]. In this instance, instead of medical procedures and practice focused on patient safety and clinical considerations, physician decisions are driven by their desire to avoid litigation and malpractice risk. 

It is a well-known fact from social science that the breadth, importance, and jurisdiction of medical care and medical services have increased exponentially over the past century, a process known as "medicalization"[@conrad_medicalization_2007]. At the same time, the various states of the United States have struggled with the appropriate level and manner of medical malpractice, introducing a great deal of variability in malpractice treatment. Given the breadth and changes across medical care and malpractice context, most studies focus on some small piece of the puzzle, often slicing by geographical closeness or medical practice, such as heart disease [@kessler_doctors_1996] or hospitals within a certain state (or set of states)[@greenberg_is_2010].

Similarly, this study limits its analysis of malpractice claims. In particular, this study focuses on mortality and malpractice allegedly resulting in death. This provides three important benefits. First, cause-of-death statistics reported by each state have been aggregated and reported by the Center for Disease Control for decades. Combining this administrative data with the National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) provide the opportunity to investigate the cross-influence for causes of death and malpractice claims. Second, the seriousness of the allegation--death--diminishes the the possibility that claims are foregone, because they are not worth litigating. In this way, this study can provide a nationwide representative analysis of the co-relation between malpractice claims and public health (as measured by mortality), but minimizes difficulties in making cross-state comparisons due to differential barriers to bringing malpractice claims across states. These differential barriers become more and more problematic the less serious the malpractice claim is, but is minimized when considering the most serious injury, because pursuit of the claim is equally justified in all states, despite possibly significant differences in barriers to the claim. Third, and perhaps most importantly, the NPDB tracks only malpractice payments; it does not provide a baseline of similar medical events which do not result in malpractice claims. Because death, and cause of death, are carefully recorded by the NVSS, it is easy to produce a series of state-wide aggregate baselines for such events by combining the NPDB with multiple mortality file from the NVSS. Limiting the NVSS to malpractice payments resulting in death allows cross-comparison relative to certain sorts of deaths, including those that did not lead to paid malpractice claims, establishing a comparison group. 

##Public Health and Mortality Due to Medical Care

Collecting cause-of-death statistics is perhaps the longest and most comprehensive public health data project ever. Some historians point to the origins of cause-of-death reporting to the institution of coroners in the Articles of Eyre in 1194 [@nemec_highlights_1976, p. 15], while others prefer to anchor it to the creation of boards of health in 15th century Europe [@moriyama_history_2011]. These two origins express the dual nature of cause-of-death reporting in the contemporary United States. The former arose with coroners as agents of state surveillance over death, and continues today to assist the state in maintaining its monopoly of lethal violence [@foucault_society_2003, p. 240], to collecting fines and taxes [@godwin_end_2005], and demarcating the beginning or end of legal obligations and rights, like an inheritance or Social Security payments. The latter arose out of serious pandemics and now employs statisticians and public health professionals to understand and eliminate public health hazards [@moriyama_history_2011]. The basic categorization of death was dichotomous: deaths were either unnatural/suspicious, resulting directly from human intervention or natural, death from nonhuman means.

At the advent of germ theory, the classification of medical cause of death, nosology, became an expertise in its own right. The systems of classification and standardization of clinical objects have been an international project since the late 19th century under the expertise of nosology and the auspices of the World Health Organization (WHO) and its International Classification of Disease (ICD) system. The United States has used the International Classification of Disease (ICD) since 1900 [@hetzel_history_1997], and has been at the forefront of initiatives in revising the ICD and  the automated coding of the ICD [@moriyama_history_2011]. The ICD system consists of a preset list of acceptable clinical diagnoses causing or contributing to death, and a set of decision rules for selecting the underlying cause of death from among clinical diagnoses presented on any death certificate. The list and the coding rules, where implemented, provide comparability of death statistics across geographical space and over time.

The ICD provides a comprehensive classification system, forking dramatically from the simple division between natural and unnatural causes to include detailed clinical descriptions. The most recent version of the ICD, ICD-10 became effective in the United States beginning 1999 [@anderson_comparability_2001]. And the nosological classifications are extremely detailed and comprehensive. ICD-10 contains over 8,000 separate and independent causes of death [@centers_for_disease_control_and_prevention_national_center_for_health_statistics_icd-10_2011]. These causes of death include things like 19 types of falls [@centers_for_disease_control_and_prevention_national_center_for_health_statistics_icd-10_2011] (W00-W19; distinguishing falls from ladders and falls from stairs)  and "Failure of sterile precautions during surgical operation" (Table S-1, Y62.0). Analyzing causes of death categorized under the ICD usually utilizes a clinically significant aggregation classification. The most common aggregation is the 113 clinically significant causes of death prepared and published by Federal agency the National Center for Health Statistics [@anderson_comparability_2001]. Lists of these clinically significant aggregations are readily available and updated along with changes in the ICD. One of these clinically significant categories is "Complications of medical and surgical care." A comprehensive list of these cataloged in supplemental Table S-1. [^1] Exactly how this category relates to quality of care and medical error is a subject of debate, with some analysts suggesting that it under-reports errors and others suggesting it over-reports errors.

[^1]: The official U.S. versions of ICD-10 are available as freely downloadable as .txt, .pdf, or .xls files from the CDC's public ftp server. For ease of analysis, the ICD-10 codes are also available in .csv form. The .csv file is publicly available and includes the clinically significant NCHS 113 causes of death described in Anderson [-@anderson_comparability_2001]. It was parsed from the official .txt files using Python [@bartlett_bjb40/cause_death_2015]. Table S-1 was generated using this .csv file.

While these causes of death are not, strictly, related to medical errors or failures to follow the standard of care, they *are* causes of death that are specifically related to medical care. In other words, these causes of death indicate that some medical intervention was a direct (*i.e.* "but for") cause of death for the individual in question. Some medical doctors analyzing medical errors in hospitals claim that these these causes of death far understate deaths resulting from preventable medical errors. Generally, medical error rates are high in hospitals [@classen_global_2011; @landrigan_temporal_2010; @farmer_tension_2013]. With respect to causes of death, Makary and Daniel [@makary_medical_2016] claim that medical error is the third leading cause of death in the U.S. They provide an overview of medical error, which includes the failure to follow a the standard of care. They note that there is no specific way to identify cause of death relating to error under the ICD, and use a meta-analysis from studies to extrapolate the rate of errors causing deaths. Similarly, other physicians involved in epidemiology suggest that adverse events (many of which are contained in Table S-1) are essentially preventable [@leape_preventing_1993]. From this perspective, causes of death due to medical complications are likely to represent an under-reporting of death due to medical error and malpractice. Despite the fact that the measure is imperfect, it is similar to adverse event reporting from hospitals, and does provide a measure of iatrogenic (arising from medical care) events, a key component of defensive medicine [@kessler_evaluating_2011, p. 94].

##Patient Safety and Paid Malpractice Claims Alleging Wrongful Death

*Quality of Patient Care.* Unlike empirical studies in public health and medicine which measure error rates and adverse events rates relative to the population, empirical studies of  malpractice rates are often measured relative to physicians, and sometimes weighted by the amounts paid in medical malpractice. Most of these studies are concerned with explaining changes in these rates over time, and they advance a number of reasons to explain changes in the numbers of medical malpractice claims [@paik_receding_2013].  Explanations for changes include the following: (1) tort reform, (2) health care quality, (3) Rising litigation costs, (4) more hospital-employed physicians (hospitals pay instead of physicians, declining the amount of payments), (5) NPDB and settlement, (6) changes in personal injury claims in general.

The link to public health, and the focus of this study, is the inter-relation between health care quality (as measured by mortality by complications) and malpractice claims. Studies examining the link between the quality of medical care and malpractice focus on the errors produced by medical care (often measured as hospital adverse events). Generally, medical care does result in errors, but most errors do not lead to legal claims [@baker_medical_2005]. However, the majority of legal claims do involve errors [@studdert_claims_2006]. Using a sample of claims from California (using county fixed effects), researchers associated with RAND have identified a strong negative correlation between increased patient safety indicators (PSI) (as reported by hospital adverse events) and decreased malpractice claims [@greenberg_is_2010]. A similar data strategy is employed by Black and Zabinski in Texas and Florida [@black_association_2015], making similar findings using hospital and county fixed effects regarding claim rates.

The basic relation here is that the quality of patient care is associated with subsequent malpractice claims. Better patient care is associated with subsequent drops in malpractice claims, while worse patient care leads to increases in malpractice claims. Measuring patient care in terms of mortality form complications, this leads to the following hypothesis:

**Hypothesis 1:** Changes in counts for causes-of-death resulting from medical care (complication causes) are associated with subsequent changes in paid malpractice alleging wrongful death in the same direction.

*Defensive Medicine.* On the other side of the coin, changes in the number of paid malpractice claims should be associated with changes in future quality of patient care. In particular rising medical malpractice claims (particularly when these are known to physicians) are predicted to lead to suboptimal patient care [@kessler_evaluating_2011]. Instead of focusing solely on clinically appropriate treatment for the patient, doctors become increasingly concerned with minimizing malpractice risk. Accordingly, they over treat by providing additional and unnecessary tests and procedures. While most defensive medicine studies are focused on costs of care, inappropriate over-treatment also carries with it risks (including death). As such, this sort of defensive medicine, if it occurs, should be observable in population health statistics, such as an increase in deaths due to complications of medical care. This leads to the following hypothesis.

**Hypothesis 2:** Increasing numbers of of malpractice claims are associated with subsequent increases in the number of deaths due to medical complications.

Finally, the association of increases in medical malpractice claims with defensive medicine relies on physician awareness of changes. Small perturbations in malpractice claims are unlikely to be noted by physicians. However, spikes in malpractice claims that are out of the ordinary, or significant changes to medical malpractice law are almost certain to be reported on and noted by medical providers. Given the foregoing, the association between malpractice claims and complication deaths should exist (and more strongly) spikes or significant changes in malpractice laws. This leads to the following, related hypotheses:

**Hypothesis 3a:** Spikes in malpractice claims are associated with subsequent increases in the number of deaths due to complications of medical care.

**Hypothesis 3b:** Tort reform changes are associated with subsequent increases in the number of deaths due to complications of medical care.

#Data and Methods

This study two sorts of publicly available administrative data available at the state level. First is the multiple cause of death file from the CDC Wonder database. This is an aggregation of all cause of death statistics throughout the United States. Whenever an individual dies in the United States--man, woman, or child--a coroner or medical examiner (depending on the context of death and the local laws) executes a death certificate and can identify up to 20 separate causes of death. The death certificate is collected by each state and delivered to the CDC. At the CDC, the death certificates are subject to a nosological analysis which translates the clinical identification from the death certificate into one of the 8,000 acceptable diagnoses, again, allowing up to 20 different causes of death. The CDC Wonder online database allows aggregation of these by cause of death, including any of those deaths listing complications of medical care as a cause [@centers_for_disease_control_and_prevention_national_center_for_health_statistics_multiple_2016]. A list of these causes of death is included in in the Appendix as Table S-1. The second dataset I use is the paid claims data from the NPDB public use data file [@u.s._department_of_health_and_human_services_health_resources_and_services_administration_bureau_of_helath_professions_division_of_the_practitioner_data_bank_national_2015]. The NPDB collects national data on claims paid for medical malpractice, and, since 2004 includes the severity of the claim. This includes data from physicians (and occasionally other medical practitioners) who make payments due to a claim of medical malpractice.

These two files provide measures of cross-influence of malpractice claims related to mortality, and mortality directly related to complications of medical care. First, patient safety is operationalized as the number of deaths in a state due to *complications*, which is measured simply as the number deaths from complications of medical care in each state, each year. *Malpractice claims* are measured from the NPDB as the number of paid claims resulting from death (which amounts to approximately 1/3 of the paid claims in any given year). Because mortality and cause of death differ significantly between men and women, I distinguish between paid malpractice claims and deaths resulting from complications by gender, with *female* standing as a dummy indicator for women.

*Changes in Malpractice Context.* To adjust for the malpractice and tort reform context in each state, I include a dummy variable  for each state and each year to indicate whether it has a damage cap for malpractice claims [@paik_receding_2013]. In addition, *malpractice spike* identifies whether there was a significant spike in paid malpractice claims for the state/gender combination. Specifically, it is a dummy variable indicating whether the change between the lagged malpractice value between the current year and the previous year is in the top 90th percentile of such changes or not. 

*Testing the Cross-Influence of Paid Malpractice Claims and Patient Safety.* In order to appropriately test the cross-influence of malpractice claims and patient safety on one another, estimated models include a time-lagged component. The most straightforward approach is to demean or use a first-difference estimator in the relevant models. This works in a straightforward manner for the association of malpractice claims to subsequent causes of death (hypotheses 2 and 3), because paid claims occurring in a particular year are immediately observable as are deaths related to medical complications.

For testing the association of patient safety on malpractice claims, the issue is more complicated because there is a delay between the occurrence of the event (death) and observation of the paid malpractice claims. The delay has been calculated to average about four years for most claims [@cohen_medical_2007]. Simply put, there is some required period of time after death, but before the malpractice payment for each and every case, and while the mean is approximately four years, there is variation in how long the lag between the event and payment. This means that each year of reporting for malpractice claims contains a mixture of years related to patient safety, as measured by complications deaths. Accordingly, failure to adjust for the time delay would reverse the direction of the association in time, testing the association of patient safety on malpractice claims for events that occurring several years prior.

There are a number of possible ways to adjust for this delay, including limiting the dataset and imputing values for the malpractice claims. In this study, I take a combined approach. First, I exclude all years past 2008, to ensure there is a sufficient time-delay for most of the claims. Second, I use the mean of complication mortality over a number of years prior to the malpractice claim (*lagged complication mortality*). To identify the appropriate years, I calculate actual time-lags from the NPDB. The NPDB provides information on the date of the last event as well as the date of malpractice payment ("malyear in the codebook). Calculating the difference between the last known malpractice event and malpractice payment identifies the length of the time delay. 

Figure 1 and Table 1 below identify the distribution and cumulative proportion of claims related to the time delay as observed in the NPDB. As illustrated below, while the mean is 4.63 years, the bulk of paid claims for mortality occurrence happen between 2 and 5 years after the occurrence (approximately 64% of the sample).  To correct for delayed observation of malpractice payments, models testing the influence of patient safety on paid malpractice claims (hypothesis 1 and 2) use the mean number of deaths related to complications from 2 to 5 years prior to year of the paid claims. This provides a smooth and sensible imputation for patient safety given the distributions pictured in Figure 1.

\[Table 1 about here\]

\[Figure 1 about here\]

*Time Series Analysis.* Exploiting the panel nature of the data, I estimate hybrid random/fixed effects negative binomial models, adjusting for state and gender-specific effects [@allison_fixed_2009, pp. 65-68].

I utilize this approach rather than a state-level fixed-effects approach for two reasons. First, the dependent variable in all instances is a count variable, and the fully conditional "fixed effects" models do not control for all stable state-level characteristics [@allison_fixedeffects_2002]. The hybrid model is both more efficient and less biased than the fully conditional "fixed effect" negative binomial models. Second, because the measures of patient safety and paid claims are measured grossly, I anticipate small effects, making efficiency of the method an important consideration [@allison_fixed_2009].

Written as a two-level model, these take the following form:

Level 1 (within-state effects):

$$
g(y_{it}) =  \beta_i +  \delta (\bar{x}_{i \cdot} - x_{it}) + \omega_{it}
$$

Level 2 (between-state effects):

$$
\beta_i = \lambda z_i + \gamma \bar{x}_{i \cdot} + \epsilon_i
$$

Where $y_{it}$ is the count of paid malpractice claims or deaths due to medical complications (dependent on the model) in year $t$ for state $i$. $g()$ represents the negative binomial link function (log-linear) described more fully in Allison [-@allison_fixed_2009, p. 61]. $x$ is a matrix of time-varying characteristics for each state, including the lagged value of paid malpractice claims or medical complications (depending on the model) and whether the state has a currently imposed damages cap (as a measure of tort reform measures within the state). $z$ is a matrix of fixed state characteristics, including a dummy variable series indicator for the patient gender and year fixed effects (to adjust for the declining trend of paid claims). This hybrid model identifies the *within-state* effects ($\delta$) over time, which indicate the predicted effect of a change in the relevant variable $x$ on any state $i$ with respect to the predicted count of paid malpractice claims or deaths due to medical complications. It also identifies the *between-state* effects at level 2, including a vector of effects for constant state characteristics along with a constant (intercept) effect ($\lambda$) and the between-state effects of time-varying variables ($\gamma$). The random errors of level two across states ($\epsilon_i$) are assumed to be distributed normally with mean 0 and variance $\tau^2$ [@raudenbush_hierarchical_2002]. These models are estimated using Stata's xtnbreg function. Notably, different modeling strategies, including a feasible generalized least squares estimator, within-state fixed effects estimators, and differing link functions (linear, Poisson) all return similar substantive results.

#Results

The descriptive statistics provide some preliminary evidence that there is a relationship between paid malpractice claims and deaths due to complications in each state. Table 2 provides basic descriptive statistics across the relevant years for both dependent variables, as well as the proportion of states with a damage cap. These figures are measured within each state, and separately for men and women. In each year, there is a decrease in the mean of both paid malpractice claims and deaths due to complications of medical care, which is consistent with a long-term decline in claims [@paik_receding_2013]. In addition, there is a slight increase in states implementing a formal damages cap over this period.  

\[table 2 about here\]

Figure 1 provides more detail regarding the dependent variables The left panel illustrates the distributions of both dependent variables. The box plots illustrate that both have long right tails. The wide variance given the relatively smaller means are suggestive of an overdispersed counting process. Visually, the distributions are quite similar, although deaths due to complications appear to be larger by a factor of about 10. Means for Paid Malpractice claims rest between the mid 20s and mid 30s (column 1 of Table 2), while the means for deaths due to medical complications range between the mid 200s and low 300s (column 3 of Table 2). This is also mirrored in the distributions. For example, the largest extremes in the count occur in 2003 and 2004 for both variables (left panel of Figure 2). The right panel of Figure 2 is simply a scatter plot for each of the variables. The plot shows a fairly consistent and positive associaton between both variables, which appear to vary in size together. 

\[figure 2 about here\]

Table 3 reports results of a negative binomial hybrid regression with paid malpractice claims as the dependent variable. Table 3 provides support of hypothesis 1 showing an association between deaths due to medical complications and subsequent paid malpractice claims (based on claims of wrongful death). Model 1 provides a baseline without deaths due to complications. This model provides a number of inferences consistent with prior literature. For example, the year fixed effects all show an increasingly negative association, showing a year-over-year decline in paid malpractice claims [@paik_receding_2013]. Model 1 also shows a negative effect for females, showing a smaller number of paid claims are for women. For damage caps, there is a negative, but insignificant effect based on differences between states in damage caps (4th row of Model 1). [^2] In contrast, the *within-state* effect of damage caps is significant and negative. This represents the effect of a state changing it's damage-cap status. In other words, the adoption of a damage cap is associated with a decline in paid malpractice claims. This pattern is consistent with research suggesting that damage caps have primarily a short term impact [@baker_medical_2005, p. 129].

[^2]: As illustrated in the equations above, this effect is calculated as the mean value of the dummy variable of a damage cap for the state over the observation period ($\bar{x}_{i \cdot}$). States with a cap over the whole period have a value of 1. States persistently with no cap have a value of 0, and states which switch caps have a value between 0 and 1 representing the proportion of the observational period that a cap was in place.

\[table 3 about here\]

Model 2 includes the direct test of hypothesis 1 by including lagged number of deaths due to medical complications (*lagged complication mortality*). There is a significant and positive effect for *both* the within-state and between-state effects (rows 1 and 3 of Model 2 in Table 3), consistent with the predictions of hypothesis 1. Figure 3 plots predicted number of paid claims conditional an the number of deaths from complications (holding all other variables at their means).  

\[figure 3 about here\] 

Figure 3 shows a fairly small, but noticeable increase in paid malpractice claims as deaths due to medical complications increase, predicting an increase of approximately 25-30 paid claims for an differences of 400 deaths due to medical complications between states. Within-state differences are even smaller, but provide even stronger evidence of the association, because it compares *changes* across the same state (with fixed state characteristics held constant). Mean changes of lagged complication mortality ($\bar{x}_{i \cdot} - x_{it}$) is centered on 0, but an increase of 200 within a state leads to an increase of paid claims of about 7. Which, while small,represents an increase of almost 25% of the mean counts of paid claims (*see* Table 1). Finally, in model 2, including lagged complication mortality mediates the negative association between women and paid claims, suggesting that there may be a gender differential in quality of care (and hence error and malpractice claims). 

Table 4 tests the association between paid malpractice claims and subsequent complication mortality, or the defensive medicine hypotheses (hypotheses 2-3). Table 4 provides support for hypothesis 2 and 3a, that paid malpractice claims, and spikes in paid malpractice claims are associated with subsequent mortality from medical complications. However, there is no support for hypothesis 3b, that tort reform (measured by damage caps) has any association with subsequent mortality from medical complications.

\[table 4 about here\]

Table 4 presents the results of 3 nested models. Model 3 of Table 4 provides a baseline model similar to model 1 of Table 3, which also provides a test of hypothesis 3b. Model 1 shows no statistically significant association between damage caps and deaths due to complications of medical care, whether *between-state* or *within-state*. This model does, however, show a year-over-year decline in these deaths as shown by the negative coefficients for the year fixed effects. In addition, there negative coefficient for female indicating fewer deaths from complications are assigned to women on their death certificates.

Model 4 of Table 2 provides support of hypothesis 2 that increases in paid malpractice claims at both the *between-state* and *within-state* levels (rows 1 and 3). As with the association in hypothesis 1, this is a small, but statistically significant set of effects. The between-state effect is plotted in Figure 5 below. 

\[figure 5 about here\]

Figure 5 shows that states with higher average levels of Paid Malpractice claims have, on average, higher numbers of deaths due to medical complications in subsequent years. There is a fairly steep increase, but the uncertainty in the estimate also increases dramatically after about 80 paid malpractice claims. In addition, there is a small, but statistically significant effect for *within-state* changes as shown in row 1 of Model 4. This means that states with increasing (or decreasing) numbers of paid malpractice claims have increasing (or decreasing) numbers of deaths due to medical complications in subsequent years. 

Model 5 of Table 4 provides support of hypothesis 3a that large spikes in paid malpractice claims (defined as a year-over-year change in claims that is in the top 90th percentile of all observed changes in claims) is associated with subsequent increases in deaths due to medical complications. In this case, the *between-state* effect is positive and highly significant; whereas, the within-state effect is not. This means a single-year spike in malpractice claims is not statistically different from a smaller increase. However, the *between-state* effect measures the amount of time a state experiences these spikes in malpractice claims. This coefficient shows that large increases in paid malpractice claims over more than one year is associated with larger numbers of deaths due to medical complications. States with 2 years of spikes in paid malpractice claims are predicted to have 104 (80-130, 95% C.I.) more deaths due to medical complications, and states with 3 years of spikes are predicted to have 203 (122-284, 95% C.E.) more deaths due to medical complications. 

#Discussion and Conclusion

intro paragraph: set out to test simple assocition with cause of death

there is a mutual association between both malpractice claims and deaths due to complications -- both in the same direction

may well be that the declining trend in each is self-reenforcing

limitations: no racial/age differences (b/c small). limited to death, and takes a gross example of wrongful death; thee are small figures and may be explained by a few places within a state, instead of state-level datas 



but it does show the usefulness of combining agency data, and provides a number of fairly simple and straightforward avenues for expanding:

```talk about gender mediation in table 1```

```also provides small-scale (county) measures```

```also provides the possibility to look at different causes of death```


#References